---
title: "Lacking Motivation"
date: 2022-07-23T02:07:43-05:00
draft: true
excerpt:
  My latest experience going into, and out of, the tragic loop of low motivation
  and low performance at work.
---

First of all, I'm no authority about the topic of Motivation. All of what is
written here is personal experience, my own thoughts, and what my (very)
restricted knowledge about psychology allowed me to write.

Read this as a form of company if you're going through the same. Or if you're
just wondering how it may feel a situation like this.

But don't read it as a recommendation, guide, or something like that. It's
better to talk to a professional if you need help (you may).

Burst of energy.

I feel like what I'm doing at work isn't having any impact. And not only because
I felt that, but because the project I was working out was explicitly referred
to as "low priority", to the point that all the team working on it was splitted
into different teams, priorizing other projects that I personally didn't feel
"goal-aligned" to.

So I started to feel pretty demotivated to keep working. Which effectively made
me stop working. I no longer had any desire to make an effort. I defaulted to
making the minimum effort, I stopped being propositive, and altogether stopped
caring.

I haven't came back to my original state of "being", which is being motivated,
enjoying my work, knowing that what I'm doing matters and produces impact, and
thinking about my future inside the company and the project (optimistically).

But at least I'm aware of what is going on inside my head. I have some ideas on
how I could start reverting these behaviors and ideas, and I'm more optimistic
about my future. Either in or out my current company.

I don't want to quickly quit after a minor setback, if it's a minor setback. But
I don't want to stick around here if this is a definitive change. I guess that's
life. And I cannot separate my professional life from my personal life, no
matter how much I try. Because your career impacts the amount of free time you
get, (at this stage of my life) my income, and I spend most of my "brain
capacity" there.

So it's a decision that requires the due dilligence of knowing that you may not
be doing the right decision. But that you're happy with it. And that odds are,
you're also not making the worst decision (if something like that exists).

I want to commit. I don't believe my career is greater than my "main" purpose in
life. But I want to feel that I'm commited to something in my career. And that
what I'm doing, I'm doing it **purposefully**. That I have agency. That I'm not
just letting things happen, and letting myself go with the current.

I like the song The Show Must Go On. There are two versions of it, one in which
the chorus sings

> But I must let the show go on,
>
> --- by Three Dog Night

and one that says

> But I won't let the show go on,
>
> --- by Leo Sayer

I lake the latter version best because it implies that you (assuming you're
singing it) have agency. And you have influence over something. In this case,
the show.

And I may not have agency and influence over the whole company. But I do over my
role within it. And my career.

---

This thing has avoided myself from getting proper sleep.

I don't enjoy work days in which I end up feeling drained of all my energy, in
which for the rest of the day I'm just "surviving", having no interest in doing
anything.

And as much as I dislike those days, I prefer them over the type of days I've
been getitng lately: started with my energy already drained.

Not wanting to get up. Not wanting to even walk. Waking up just to wanting to go
back to bed again.

I'm amazed at how something that shouldn't (beucase I'm consciously trying not
to make it like that) matter that much, and influence that big in my personal
life, do so.

It stresses me. And I found about it because, after around 6-7 years, I started
to have acne again. Not even after having variable poor diets over the years.

---

So well, what I'm going to do to go back to "normal", or at least, go back to
before I got up hating my day already at morning.

First, realize that I have alternatives. Even in the worst case scenario, I'll
survive. I may struggle, I may find desperation. I may take a long time to
recover. But I'll survive.

Plus, the worst scenario is not the most likely. I'm still employable. I'm still
good at what I do. And I'm still valuable to company that may be looking for
someone with my skills.

For me, at the moment, it's not a good idea to just quit, as I need a paycheck,
I'm not certain of the time I'll take to find another job, and in general, it's
not the best time to let go of your main income source.

But I need to feel that what I'm doing, is because I actively desire to do it.
And because I'm acting. Because I'm still agent.

So I set up a few conditions with myself.

I'll keep performing as best as I'm able to. I'll let my manager (or the closest
role to it) that I'm doing this. I'll set goals that will make me feel that I'm
again appreciated, that what I do has impact, and that my work is worth what I'm
charging for.

Adaptability is a great skill. In my personal life, I try to promote the idea
that "you can adapt to the new situation instead of sticking to an original plan
that now doesn't look like the best idea". But here at work, those changes
affected me. I guess **that could also have hurt my sense of self-knowledge**:
"If I'm so open to changes, why I feel against this one?".

But Quitting should also be considered a skill. Like in a relationship, it may
imply that you have limits. That you have conditions. That you have preferences,
and you're searching to maximize the accomplishment and fulfillment of all those
(with its own considerations, like making compromises and meeting in common
ground).

---

This also creates the idea in me that I'll be creating a _"Fuck-off fund"_, or
_"Fuck-you fund"_. Which, more than an emergency fund, is an amount of money
that lets you to temporarily let go of your main income source, without risking
your financial health, your long term goals, and without making it an emergency.

I want to be able to stand up for myself. To be proud. To defend what I believe
in. And to do so without thinking that I may be risking my stability and
lifestyle. It'd be admirable to do so, I concede. But it's an admiration I'm
willing to let go, haha.

---

So yeah, I'll be open about how I've been feeling. The expectations I have, and
better be met for me to keep a positive impression of the company, and the
things I'm willing, unwilling, and looking for to do while I'm still employed
here.

---

Also, I felt somewhat unwilling to raise this topics, because I felt a rejection
could push me down further.
