---
title: "Living a broader life"
date: 2019-12-27T17:47:57-06:00
toc: true
draft: true
---

Last week I read [Range][range], by David Epstein, and it immediately ended up
being one of my favorite reads in 2019.

Reading it kept me nodding and chuckling, and I stopped a few times to wonder on
the implications of some of the ideas in the book.

I've already written [a review][review]. However, this is both less and more
than a review. I won't explore all the content from the book, but for the parts
that I'll, I'm going to connect and relate to some aspects of my personal life.

When I read something I agree with without doubts, I try to be careful and
analyze whether I agree with it because the argument is properly built and
stands to reason, or because I already had those ideas and was just looking for
confirmation.

I can't tell with certainty that the former was true. However, I'll still go and
write my reflections on this.

---

I remember being pretty technically-focused since I was a child. I remember me
telling myself and other people that relations and feelings didn't matter (that
much). I was pretty solitary, with very few friends and minding only my own
business.

My academic interests were pretty much leaning towards STEM. I'd learn other
things but only because I **had to**, not because of a genuine interest.

I was always like that. Until I wasn't.

## Reading

After getting into college, I started to go through a lot of mindset changes.

First of all, I started to educate myself. Both within the contents of my career
(systems engineering) and outside of it.

It all started after I read [Chaos][chaos], by James Gleick. It's the first
non-fiction I read by pure interest and curiosity. And it made me get an
interest in chaos, complexity and even anatomy.

But the most significant thing that reading that book made for me was making me
curious for things I hadn't explored before.

I started looking for some reading lists, and started adding some books from
Thomas Frank's and Bill Gates' reading lists.

Then I started to acquire more knowledge and eventually decided to drop out of
college with the aims of educating myself, trusting my own learning capabilities
to be able to build a better future.

By that time, my mindset was already embracing the idea of learning broader
rather than deeper (which is the main point of this post).

I started to acquire admiration and respect over a broad knowledge, rather than
deep knowledge.

ANd so far I've been guiding my learning like that. Some exploration, and then
some focus on interesting specifics I liked the most. It's a recursive thing.

For example, I've kept my interest for computation. And even if I get back and
learn about other non-computation fields, I always go back to this topic and
explore a little deeper.

Only to find another branch set that broadly explore before deciding things I
want to focus on.

But lately, I've been thinking that this mindset doesn't only apply to learning.

I feel like I've been actually trying to guide some life decisions with such
mindset.

I've started to be part of more variated communities. I've talked to people that
I wasn't used to talk to. I think this is great for keeping your assumptions
about other people on check.

For example, with my previous set of friends, I'd just use things like "well,
it's not an exclusive or", knowing what "exclusive or" means. But not everyone
knows what it is, so you must always try to modulate your language when trying
to communicate ideas with other people.

Other side-effect of making my social groups more variated, it's that I'm
allowed to explore more of my personalities (or sides of my personality? I don't
know, but it's irrelevant).

If I was to be kept my same community, I may have not excercised parts of me
that, even if I already considered important, I never put much effor in building
them.

I'm still want to incorporate this mindset in other parts of my life.

So far, the aspect of my life that has gone thorugh this breadth-first approach
is the intellectual one. Then it follows my social one. But others are pretty
much untouched.

My body, for example. I can't remember the last time I commited to an excercise
routine that I was able to keep for months. I think excercise it's a must in my
life if I want to live healthier.

Romantically, I'm even more lost. Around 6 years ago, I started to think "yeah,
I'll eventually pursue a relationship with someone, but first I must focus on my
carrer." Then 3 years passed, "yeah, I'll eventually pursue a relationship with
someone, but first I'll get a degree". Then 3 years passed and I dropped out,
"yeah, I'll eventually pursue a relationship with someone, but first I want to
get a job".

I think I'm getting closer to having a job, and I'm commiting myself to trying
to pursue a relationship once I do it, instead of keeping to pospone it until "i
get a better job" or something like that.

Which leads me to another thing. Should I use a "strategy" when it comes to
dating? I mean, I despise those "player" approaches. I definetely don't mean
that. But, should I aim for something meaningful and lasting since the first
moment?

Up till now, that has been my idea. But I also remember thinking about **not**
doing it that way after reading [Algorithms to live by][algotolive], and the
chapter about optimal stopping and the explore/exploit problems.

I don't want to have many meaningless and short relationships, but I don't want
to never find someone I feel comfortable with either. I think it's possible to
try something that is both casual and meaningful.

Furthermore, I think it's vital to get to know yourself. What you like, what you
don't like, how you handle disagreements, what it takes to get comfortable and
safe with someone, etc.

And I definetely think that the more you experience, the more you'll learn.

I'll still reflect on this, but it's pretty much decided. I'll explore a little
bit, keeping an open mind, and being honest with whomever I date.

But so far, I still think my main goal is achieving a meaningful and lasting
relationship.

But that (the idea of having a main long-term goal) brings me to the second
point of the book that has stole some reflection moments in those last days.

The book drops a piece of advice that I'd briefly describe (with emphasis in
**I**. You can read it and make your own ideas) as: **don't make plans for 5+
years, because you're making plans for someone who doesn't even exists yet**.

Should I trust myself when I feel convinced of wanting something in the
long-term?

One of the best peices of knowledge I acquired from the book is the "end of the
history illusion", described as the belief that the most drastic changes in your
life, personality and goals have already happened, and will keep more or less
the same in the next years.

It's hard for me to assimilate that it may be a better approach to my life.
Giving short-term planning more space and influence in my life.

Mainly because it's hard (pretty damn hard) to know what I want in the short
term. I just can't keep my eye and head out of the long lasting effect of any
decision I make. Specially since every once in a while I wonder at how single
decisions (or situations that were out of my hands) that seemed irrelevant,
completely changed my life.

Picking up Chaos: The making of a new Science is definetely one of those. Maybe
if I hadn't done it, I'd still be on college, hoping to graduate next year and
looking for the "bolsa de trabajo" entries, wondering what I may end up working
in after I graduate.

Hadn't I join the volunteering team I joined a year ago, and I may had not learn
to loosen up my assumptions around people, get interested in emotional
intelligence, and filantropy.

I don't know. I'm constantly saying I'm happy, and excited and optimist about my
future.

This doesn't make it change. I'm still happy, and I'm still excited and optimist
about my future. It just puts some pressure in me. I want to start accepting
(and actively looking for) different experiences that don't fit with the past of
what I've planned my future self to be.

I want to keep changing. I want to keep learning, and broadening my
perspectives. I want to meet new people, acquire new hobbies, explore different
careers. I want to perceive myself as someone with a broad set of knowledge,
capable of mixing

---

I've been lately experiencing some events of what I'd call "".

For example, I think that it's easy to blame GMOs and say that "natural,
non-modified organisms are better than those mass-produced things, eww". Then
you read a little and learn that GMOs are not that bad after all. That thay may
even be the best option if we're trying to avoid famines and keep feeding
generations to come.

But then you keep reading and learn that, in fact, GMOs may be a pretty bad
option, but not for the reasons that the easy argument allows.

Of course, I shouldn't take this to the extreme. Making only breath explorations
and never focusing on something to invest more time on, it's maybe even more
harmful than the opposite.

It should be in balance. Looking for a more appropiate algorithm other than
breadth-first, I'd choose Hill-climbing. You exploit something up to an extent
in which you feel you're not making much progress, and then start exploring
other things, until you find another -worth path, and repeat.

[range]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/41795733-range
[review]: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/3082863407
[chaos]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/64582.Chaos
